---
title: "ReactJS"
metaTitle: "ReactJS | DevBucket"
metaDescription: ""
---

## Introduction

## React Design Pattern

React is a popular JavaScript library for building user interfaces. Here are some design patterns that are commonly used in React:

- **Container/Presenter Pattern:** This pattern separates the concerns of data and presentation in React components. Containers are responsible for fetching and managing data, while presenters are responsible for rendering that data.
- **Higher-Order Component (HOC) Pattern:** This pattern is a way to reuse component logic. It involves wrapping a component in a higher-order component that provides additional functionality.
- **Render Props Pattern:** This pattern involves passing a function as a prop to a component, which then uses that function to render its output. This allows for flexible and reusable components.
- **Controlled Component Pattern:** This pattern involves using state to manage the values of form elements in a React component. This provides more control over the form's behavior and makes it easier to validate user input.
- **Compound Component Pattern:** This pattern involves composing multiple components together to create a single, more complex component. This promotes reusability and encapsulation of logic.
- **Provider Pattern:** This pattern involves using the React Context API to provide data to components throughout the application without having to pass props down through multiple levels of the component hierarchy.
- **State Reducer Pattern:** This pattern involves passing a state reducer function as a prop to a component, which then uses that function to manage its state. This can help to simplify complex state logic and make it more reusable.

These are just a few examples of the design patterns that can be used in React. By using these patterns, developers can write more maintainable, reusable, and scalable code.

## Interview Question
- Why create-react-app does not start offline
- What does ws://localhost:3000/ws mean in react app
- Why Key is important in looped content
- Is `<App>` !== `App()` ?
- 
## Resources

> Some github to follow
- https://github.com/enaqx/awesome-react
- https://github.com/sudheerj/reactjs-interview-questions
